Today we're going to be doing
testing in node and the browser.
Node already has a built in thing
called assert it's part of core, so
you don't even have to
NPM install anything.
This is, if you don't even
want to install any libraries,
this is a perfectly valid way to test.
So why don't we just look and
see how that works?
So when you require the assert package
in NPM, here I'm just in the node REPL.
If you type node, you can get into this.
If you get stuck in this,
you can type Ctrl+D and
you'll get back out again,
just in case that happens.
So if we require assert,
you can see all of the methods
that we have on the assert object.
Actually in the REPL, you don't even
have to require the core modules.
They're just available.
So we've got all of these
ways of doing assertions.
So the main idea with assertions is that
these are things that you wanna test.
So, for example, if you wanna
test that two things are equal,
you can use assert.equal.
So I can show you what
that will look like.
assert.equal(1,1) doesn't do anything,
which is just as well but
what happens when those are not equal?
Well, then we get an exception and
the error message also tells us a little
bit of information about how that works.
So there's also assert.ok.
So, if you pass in anything that's true or
truthy, so
anything that's not a zero or
an empty string or false.
But if you do pass in something
that's falsie, you get an exception.
So there's also different ways to
negate those kinds of assertions.
So we could do things like notOk,
or I guess,
notEqual, for example.
So if we do notEqual,
then if we do pass in two values
that are equal, we get an exception.
>> Question,
what is this unit test library?
>> This library is called assert.
So it's part of node core.
And assert is very simple.
All that it does is it throws exceptions
when the arguments that you give it
don't match or do match, depending on
which assertion method you're using.
Yeah, if you type in node
then you'll get the node
REPL-
>> Yes.
>> And then require assert.
>> Yeah.
You don't even have to require assert,
you can just type assert.
In a normal program though you
would have to require assert, so
it's kind of a good habit to do
var assert = require('assert').
So normally in your node program,
you would type something like this line,
right here.
And then that would give you the assert
library and you can poke around with that.
So let's go ahead and make a library.
Make a make a little test suite,
just with the assert package,
just to give you an idea for
what the strength of the SPR chart and
also what some of its
failure modes can be.
So we're going to write a little
program that's gonna run a node.
So I'm going to use some things like
the fs package, things of that sort.
So we'll call this test js.
We can require the assert package.
And then we can do assert.equal(1+2).
Maybe we also have, like we have
a special function here that's gonna read
from a file and
tell us the number of lines.
So I'm gonna have a test file here.
I'll just call it file.txt cuz I'm
not feeling particularly imaginative.
It's gonna have three lines.
So here, this is just a program on
the command line to count the number of
lines in a file, so it should be three.
I'm gonna have a little function
that's going to do the same thing.
And just want to make sure that
my function works the way that
that command on the command line works.
So I'm gonna call this
function countlines,
gonna load the fs package,
and I'm gonna read in a file.
So fs.readFile('file.txt'.
If there's an error,
I really ought to do something about it.
So I'm gonna have a callback
that I'm gonna pass in.
This will just kind of give you
an idea for how this function works.
If there's an error,
I need to call that callback.
Otherwise, I need to do,
there's another parameter we can pass so
that we get a string.
So I'm going to split on new line.
And then I'm going to call the length.
So that's going to be,
you don't really have to
understand completely how this works,
but the basic idea
is that it's gonna count the number of
lines in that file and give us the result.
So maybe I messed up the implementation,
like maybe I'm gonna sabotage this
right now just to prove something.
So what if, for example, you know what?
So if I split on length,
that's one way of doing it.
I could also just count
the number of newline characters,
which is another way that
would I don't think work, but
I'm just gonna add 100 to, this would
be an example of a mistake [LAUGH].
In this case, it was intentional,
but oftentimes it's not.
So if I call my countlines function,
I know that that File('file.txt'
has 3 lines in it, so
I can pass in a callback and
I should get back either
an error as the first argument.
This is sort of just a Node.js convention.
So if I have an error, I really want to
throw an exception with the assert module.
assert has something baked
in called assert.ifError.
And you can pass it,
the error object, if there is one.
If there's no error
object that you pass in,
then that function will just succeed and
go on to the next thing.
So the other thing that I wanna
do is I wanna test an equality.
I wanna make sure that the number of lines
that I get back from that implementation
is equal to what I expect.
So in this case, it's three because there
ought to be three lines in that file,
except it's been sabotaged.
So this ought not to work.
So now, if I run this program,
I see 3 == undefined.
So that's even a different error.
I guess I already had an error.
That's good.
So, our test suite in this case is telling
us that there's a problem with this
implementation, which is fantastic.
So happens to be on line four.
Right.
So my first assert that I did, 1+2,
I didn't actually specify the second
thing that I wanted to test.
So it's another thing to be
careful of when you write tests
is you wanna make sure that your
test also doesn't have bugs.
It's bad enough if your
implementation has bugs.
But if your test suite is also buggy,
then that's gonna be even more difficult.
You'd have to write another test,
so test your tests.
[LAUGH] I wouldn't go that far overboard,
all though I do know people who
do that kind of thing sometimes.
So here we are.
I fixed that error,
can run the test again.
Here we go.
Now
we're getting a different error 104 == 3.
Notice how I added 100?
So I was expecting something like 103,
so I guess my program already had a bug.
That's useful.
I didn't even have to add one.
This is how it goes with testing,
often times.
So if that's the case,
why is that the case?
>> Need a line break after the last line?
>> Yep.
So if I actually do a quick read file test
on the command line, so I'm just gonna
use the sync version, all though I want
the implementation to be asynchronous
because I'm gonna show something.
Okay, so here's that file.
There's one, two, and three.
If you split on new line, and
there's a bit of extra fluff at
the end that's an empty string.
So, what we wanna do is if there
is an empty string at the end,
we wanna just cut it off.
So there's a function on strings
called trim that should get rid of
that extra bit at the end.
So now if we run our test,
our non-sabotaged test, we still
get an error because that's not a property
on arrays, it's a property on strings.
So here we go.
I've now hopefully fixed this test.
I can close that.
And I fixed it.
You might notice that we get no output,
so that's not really very helpful.
Node is gonna set the exit code to 0,
so that's a little bit of a help but
you might notice how this kind
of test suite could go wrong.
Like, what if I forgot to call a callback?
It would exit and
it wouldn't say anything and
it would just kinda look
identical to a successful case.
So if I do that, if I just forgot
to actually call the callback or
I called it twice or something,
I would get the same kind of output.
Which is just to exit and
to exit successfully without failing,
without raising an exception.
So, that's kind of some of
the problems also, yeah, question.
>> What's the dollar sign you had
in there, where did that come from?
>> This is just something that's
available on the command line.
It's the exit code.
>> Okay.
Yeah.
I'll talk a little bit more about exit
codes when we get into the section about
setting scripts and package JSON.
So, a little bit anyways,
but this is basically how
things like NPM tests or
if you set up continuous integration,
this is like the lowest common denominator
for those systems to know when your
tests succeeded or when other
system scripts succeeded or not.
I can show you an example of, if I put
one of these errors back like I make that
four, and I run the test,
now the execute code is 1, so it's not 0.
Anything that's not 0 is a failure case.
Okay, so hopefully that gives you
kind of an idea of how, yeah,
this is a very simple way to do things.
All though, it's kind of riddled with
problems if you're not very careful and
you can accidentally have cases where
callbacks aren't being called and
this sort of thing.
Also, exceptions are gonna
halt your program.
So, if you just kind of wanna
get a general sense for,
well, you know, I have 20,000 tests and
maybe 5 of them are failing but
maybe they're kinda in the beginning,
so I don't want my tests to stop there.
I want them to like keep going anyways,
even though there's some failures.
That's not something that you're
gonna get with the assert module.
However, I think that the general set of
methods that you get with the assert
package are pretty handy.
So we've got things like ok,
equal, deepEqual,
those are reasonable ways to
do these kind of assertions.